POSIX UTILITY CONVENTIONS
A summary of IEEE Std 1003.1 (The Open Group Base Specifications)

This document summarizes the utility conventions defined by POSIX. It is
an original summary, not a reproduction of the standard. The authoritative
text is at: https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/


OPTION SYNTAX
-------------

Options are single characters preceded by a hyphen: -a, -b, -c

Options that take arguments:
  -o file       option and argument separated by whitespace
  -ofile        option and argument adjacent (no space); both forms required

Options without arguments may be clustered:
  -abc          equivalent to -a -b -c

The argument -- signals end of options. All following tokens are treated
as operands (non-option arguments) even if they begin with a hyphen.

A single - operand (not --) is conventionally used to mean standard input
in place of a file argument.

Options should precede operands. Utilities are not required to support
options appearing after operands; portable scripts must not rely on this.

Option names use lowercase letters. Digits are permitted but avoid them
where a letter can serve. Do not use -- as a prefix for POSIX-defined
options (that is a GNU extension).


OPERANDS (ARGUMENTS)
--------------------

Operands follow options and their arguments. A utility must process all
options before treating remaining tokens as operands, unless -- has been
seen.

When a utility accepts file arguments and none are given, it should read
from standard input (the filter pattern).


STANDARD STREAMS
----------------

  stdin  (fd 0)  Standard input
  stdout (fd 1)  Standard output. Normal results go here.
  stderr (fd 2)  Standard error. Diagnostic messages go here, never to
                 stdout. A program that intermixes errors and data on
                 stdout cannot be used in a pipeline.

Diagnostic messages must be written to stderr regardless of whether stdout
is a terminal.


EXIT STATUS
-----------

  0       Successful completion
  1-125   Failure. Specific meanings are utility-defined.
  126     The command was found but could not be executed (permission error
          or not an executable).
  127     The command was not found.
  128+n   Terminated by signal n (convention; not mandated by POSIX but
          widely adopted).

A utility must not exit with 0 when it fails. A utility must not exit
with non-zero on success.

When a utility processes multiple files and one fails, it should continue
processing the remaining files and exit non-zero when done.


ERROR MESSAGES
--------------

Error messages should identify the utility and the nature of the error:

  utilityname: description

When the error relates to a file:

  utilityname: filename: description

Messages should be brief, lowercase, without trailing period. Write them
to stderr.


ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
---------------------

POSIX defines a set of standard environment variables that utilities must
respect. The most relevant:

  HOME        home directory of the invoking user
  PATH        search path for command names
  TMPDIR      directory for temporary files (default /tmp if absent)
  LANG        locale name; used to set all LC_* categories at once
  LC_ALL      overrides all other LC_* variables
  LC_COLLATE  sort order
  LC_CTYPE    character classification and case conversion
  LC_MESSAGES language for diagnostic messages
  LC_MONETARY monetary formatting
  LC_NUMERIC  numeric formatting (decimal point, thousands separator)
  LC_TIME     date and time formatting
  NLSPATH     search path for message catalogs
  PAGER       preferred paging program
  EDITOR      preferred text editor
  VISUAL      preferred visual (full-screen) editor
  SHELL       pathname of the user's preferred shell
  TERM        terminal type
  TZ          timezone

Utilities must not modify PATH, HOME, or other inherited variables except
for documented reasons. Temporary file directories should respect TMPDIR.


STANDARD INPUT AS DEFAULT
--------------------------

A utility that operates on files should accept zero file arguments and
read standard input in that case. This enables use in pipelines:

  cat file | utility        # reads from pipeline
  utility file              # reads from file argument
  utility                   # reads from stdin (interactive or piped)

This is the filter pattern. Utilities that follow it compose freely.


LOCALE AND PORTABILITY
----------------------

Utilities must not assume ASCII. Character classification (is this a
letter? a digit?) must be done through locale-aware functions, not by
comparing byte values.

Filenames may contain any byte except NUL and slash (with slash reserved
as the path separator). Portable filenames use only: letters, digits,
period, hyphen, underscore. A leading hyphen can be confused with an
option; the construct ./-file or -- -file avoids this.


SIGNALS
-------

Utilities should handle SIGINT and SIGTERM gracefully: clean up temporary
files and exit. A utility that catches a signal and wants to report
termination by signal should re-raise the signal after cleanup so the
parent process sees a signal exit status.

SIGPIPE is received when a utility writes to a pipeline whose reader has
exited. The conventional response is to exit silently with a non-zero
status (often 1 or 141).


TEMPORARY FILES
---------------

Temporary files must be created in TMPDIR (defaulting to /tmp). File
names must be unpredictable to avoid symlink attacks; use mktemp(1).
Temporary files and directories must be removed on exit, including on
error. Use a trap to ensure cleanup.


THE FILTER PATTERN SUMMARIZED
------------------------------

A utility that follows the filter pattern:

  1. Reads from each FILE argument in sequence, if given.
  2. Reads from standard input if no FILE arguments are given, or if
     a FILE argument is the single character -.
  3. Writes results to standard output.
  4. Writes errors and warnings to standard error.
  5. Exits 0 on success, non-zero on any error.

This design allows utilities to be composed arbitrarily in pipelines and
to be used interchangeably with files or streams.


REFERENCES
----------

The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 8 (IEEE Std 1003.1-2024):
  https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/

Utility Conventions (XBD Chapter 12):
  https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/basedefs/V1_chap12.html

Environment Variables (XBD Chapter 8):
  https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/basedefs/V1_chap08.html

POSIX.1 FAQ (Austin Group, maintained by Andrew Josey, The Open Group):
  https://www.opengroup.org/austin/papers/posix_faq.html
  Covers the history, versioning, certification, and technical scope of
  IEEE Std 1003.1. Useful for understanding what POSIX is and is not.
